Niles GXR2 control information

Please note that these notes are a work in progress and may contain incomplete or incorrect information.  They are intended for reference only.

The information contained in this document was obtained by monitoring network traffic between a Niles GXR2 and one of its controllers using Wireshark.  Buttons on the controller were pushed, and the results recorded and compared to see which bytes changed.  These results could be duplicated by bridging a laptop between a Niles GXR-2 and a controller.  The controller uses standard RJ-45 female connectors with the following pin outs: 

1    TX+
2    TX-
3    RX+
4    IR Signal
5    IR Ground
6    RX-
7    UI Power (12VDC)
8    UI Ground

The transmit and receive pairs on the connectors comply with the IEEE 803.3 standard, so the transmit pair from the controller can be connected to the receive pair of the laptop using a network bridge.  Do not plug the laptop directly into any of the controller ports on the GXR2, as damage to both the laptop and the GXR2 will, most likely, occur.  In other words, if you don’t know how to properly do this, don’t try it.

Controllers are two-way devices.  They send data to the GXR-2 using UDP protocol with assigned IP addresses in the range of 10.100.x.x.  They receive data from the GXR-2 using UDP protocol with multicast addresses in the range of 232.0.0.x.  All controllers receive the same multicast messages.

The Niles GXR-2 is a DHCP server and it issues a lease to each controller in the range of 10.100.0.x/16.  This precludes connecting the GXR-2 to your local area network, unless you use a smart switch to filter out DHCP packets.  If you make the mistake of directly connecting the GXR-2 to your network, its DHCP server will issue a lease to any device that asks for one.  Since the DHCP server is not configurable and doesn’t issue a gateway, your network will start acting weird.

A simple way to control the GXR-2 is to configure a Raspberry Pi computer with an Apache web server and then connect the wired connection of the Raspberry Pi directly into the management port.  The Niles GXR-2 will give the wired connection of the Raspberry Pi a DHCP lease for its 10.100.X.X network, and the wireless connection will allow other computers on the local network to access the Web server on the Raspberry Pi.  

There are two kinds of traffic used for control and status in the Niles system.  They are keypad commands and status update messages.  Keypad commands are used to relay button presses from controllers to the GXR-2.  They are sent from controllers using IP addresses that are assigned to them by the DHCP server on the GXR-2.  Update messages are sent from the GXR-2 using multicast addresses.  These messages are used to update display settings, such as turning on or off button illumination or updating LCD displays on System Control Keypads.  Keypad commands start with 0x00 and Status update messages start with 0x03.  Keyboard commands are sent Unicast using UDP from controllers to the Niles GXR-2.  Status messages are sent Multicast from the Niles GXR-2 to controllers.

The basic format for a keypad command is as follows:

00 – Message Type
uu  -  Counter
00
vv  -  Zone ID/InputID  
00
0b
61
06
ww - Command
xx - Scope
ff


zone IDs  21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26
input IDs 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86

Commands:  
Select first input
Select second input
Select third input
Select fourth input
Select fifth input
 Select sixth input
Volume -
Volume +
2b   Previous
2c    Next
0a    Off
0b    Mute

Scope:

0 – Current Zone
2 -  All Zones

There are two different types of commands sent by controllers; zone specific and device specific.  Zone specific commands apply to functions like input selection and volume.  Device specific commands apply to functions, like Prev or Next, that are specific to one input across zones.  When sending a zone specific command, a zone id is used to specify where the command applies.  For device specific commands, a device ID is used to specify the applicable device.